C Searching and Sorting Algorithm [31 exercises with solution]
[An editor is available at the bottom of the page to write and execute the
scripts.]

Searching: [5 exercises with solution]
1. Write a C program to find the position of a target value within a sorted
array using Binary search. Go to the editor
Binary Search : In computer science, a binary search or half-interval search
algorithm finds the position of a target value within a sorted array. The
binary search algorithm can be classified as a dichotomies divide-and-conquer
search algorithm and executes in logarithmic time.
Click me to see the solution

2. Write a C program to find the position of a target value within a array
using Interpolation search. Go to the editor
From Wikipedia:
Interpolation search is an algorithm for searching for a key in an array that
has been ordered by numerical values assigned to the keys (key values). It was
first described by W. W. Peterson in 1957. Interpolation search resembles the
method by which people search a telephone directory for a name (the key value
by which the book's entries are ordered): in each step the algorithm
calculates where in the remaining search space the sought item might be, based
on the key values at the bounds of the search space and the value of the
sought key, usually via a linear interpolation. The key value actually found
at this estimated position is then compared to the key value being sought. If
it is not equal, then depending on the comparison, the remaining search space
is reduced to the part before or after the estimated position. This method
will only work if calculations on the size of differences between key values
are sensible.
Click me to see the solution

3. Write a C program to find the position of a target value within a sorted
array using Jump search. Go to the editor
Click me to see the solution

4. Write a C program to find the position of a target value within a array
using Linear search. Go to the editor
In computer science, a Linear search or sequential search is a method for
finding an element within a list. It sequentially checks each element of the
list until a match is found or the whole list has been searched
Click me to see the solution

5. Write a C program to find the position of a target value within a array
using Ternary search. Go to the editor
From Wikipedia
A ternary search algorithm is a technique in computer science for finding the
minimum or maximum of a unimodal function. A ternary search determines either
that the minimum or maximum cannot be in the first third of the domain or that
it cannot be in the last third of the domain, then repeats on the remaining
two thirds. A ternary search is an example of a divide and conquer algorithm.
Click me to see the solution

Sorting: [26 exercises with solution]
1. Write a C program to sort a list of elements using the selection sort
algorithm. Go to the editor
According to Wikipedia "In computer science, selection sort is a sorting
algorithm, specifically an in-place comparison sort. It has O(n2) time
complexity, making it inefficient on large lists, and generally performs worse
than the similar insertion sort".
Note :
a) To find maximum of elements
b) To swap two elements
Click me to see the solution

2. Write a C program to sort a list of elements using the bubble sort
algorithm. Go to the editor
Bubble Sort works by repeatedly swapping the adjacent elements if they are in
wrong order.
Click me to see the solution

3. Write a C program to sort a list of elements using the insertion sort
algorithm. Go to the editor
Insertion sort is a simple sorting algorithm that builds the final sorted
array (or list) one item at a time. It is much less efficient on large lists
than other algorithms such as quicksort, heapsort, or merge sort.
Click me to see the solution

4. Write a C program to sort a list of elements using the merge sort
algorithm. Go to the editor
Merge sort is an O(n log n) comparison-based sorting algorithm. Most
implementations produce a stable sort, which means that the implementation
preserves the input order of equal elements in the sorted output.
Click me to see the solution

5. Write a C program to sort numbers using heap sort algorithm (MAX heap). Go
to the editor
A sorting algorithm that works by first organizing the data to be sorted into
a special type of binary tree called a heap.
Click me to see the solution

6. Write a C program to sort a list of elements using the quick sort
algorithm. Go to the editor
Quick sort is a comparison sort, meaning that it can sort items of any type
for which a "less-than" relation (formally, a total order) is defined.
Note: Read n values into array and Sort using Quick Sort
Click me to see the solution

7. Write a C program to sort a list of elements using the radix sort
algorithm. Go to the editor
Radix sort is a non-comparative integer sorting algorithm that sorts data with
integer keys by grouping keys by the individual digits which share the same
significant position and value.
Click me to see the solution

8. Write a C Program for counting sort. Go to the editor
According to Wikipedia “In computer science, counting sort is an algorithm for
sorting a collection of objects according to keys that are small integers;
that is, it is an integer sorting algorithm. It operates by counting the
number of objects that have each distinct key value, and using arithmetic on
those counts to determine the positions of each key value in the output
sequence. Its running time is linear in the number of items and the difference
between the maximum and minimum key values, so it is only suitable for direct
use in situations where the variation in keys is not significantly greater
than the number of items. However, it is often used as a subroutine in another
sorting algorithm, radix sort, that can handle larger keys more efficiently”.
Click me to see the solution

9. Write a C program to display sorted list using Gnome sort. Go to the editor
Gnome sort is a sorting algorithm originally proposed by Dr. Hamid
Sarbazi-Azad (Professor of Computer Engineering at Sharif University of
Technology) in 2000 and called "stupid sort" (not to be confused with
bogosort), and then later on described by Dick Grune and named "gnome sort".
The algorithm always finds the first place where two adjacent elements are in
the wrong order, and swaps them. It takes advantage of the fact that
performing a swap can introduce a new out-of-order adjacent pair only next to
the two swapped elements.
Click me to see the solution

10. Write a C program that sort numbers using shell sorting method. Go to the
editor
According to Wikipedia "Shell sort or Shell's method, is an in-place
comparison sort. It can be seen as either a generalization of sorting by
exchange (bubble sort) or sorting by insertion (insertion sort). The method
starts by sorting pairs of elements far apart from each other, then
progressively reducing the gap between elements to be compared. Starting with
far apart elements can move some out-of-place elements into position faster
than a simple nearest neighbor exchange."
Click me to see the solution

11. Write a C program that sort numbers using QuickSort method. Go to the
editor
Note: According to Wikipedia "Quicksort is a comparison sort, meaning that it
can sort items of any type for which a "less-than" relation (formally, a total
order) is defined. Inefficient implementations it is not a stable sort,
meaning that the relative order of equal sort items is not preserved.
Quicksort can operate in-place on an array, requiring small additional amounts
of memory to perform the sorting."
Click me to see the solution

12. Write a C program that sort numbers using Bead Sort method. Go to the
editor
According to Wikipedia "Bead sort, also called gravity sort, is a natural
sorting algorithm, developed by Joshua J. Arulanandham, Cristian S. Calude and
Michael J. Dinneen in 2002, and published in The Bulletin of the European
Association for Theoretical Computer Science. Both digital and analog hardware
implementations of bead sort can achieve a sorting time of O(n); however, the
implementation of this algorithm tends to be significantly slower in software
and can only be used to sort lists of positive integers. Also, it would seem
that even in the best case, the algorithm requires O(n2) space".
Click me to see the solution

13. Write a C program that sort numbers using Bogo Sort method. Go to the
editor
In computer science, Bogo Sort is a particularly ineffective sorting algorithm
based on the generate and test paradigm. The algorithm successively generates
permutations of its input until it finds one that is sorted. It is not useful
for sorting but may be used for educational purposes, to contrast it with
other more realistic algorithms.
Click me to see the solution

14. Write a C program that sort numbers using Cocktail Sort method. Go to the
editor
Cocktail shaker sort (also known as bidirectional bubble sort, cocktail sort,
shaker sort, ripple sort, shuffle sort, or shuttle sort ) is a variation of
bubble sort that is both a stable sorting algorithm and a comparison sort. The
algorithm differs from a bubble sort in that it sorts in both directions on
each pass through the list. This sorting algorithm is only marginally more
difficult to implement than a bubble sort and solves the problem of turtles in
bubble sorts. It provides only marginal performance improvements, and does not
improve asymptotic performance; like the bubble sort, it is not of practical
interest, though it finds some use in education.
Click me to see the solution

15. Write a C program that sort numbers using Cycle sort method. Go to the
editor
Cycle sort is an in-place, unstable sorting algorithm, a comparison sort that
is theoretically optimal in terms of the total number of writes to the
original array, unlike any other in-place sorting algorithm. It is based on
the idea that the permutation to be sorted can be factored into cycles, which
can individually be rotated to give a sorted result.
Click me to see the solution

16. Write a C program that sort numbers using Permutation Sort method. Go to
the editor
Permutation sort, proceeds by generating the possible permutations of the
input array/list until discovering the sorted one.
Click me to see the solution

17. Write a C program to sort a list of elements using the insertionsort
algorithm. Go to the editor
Input numbers you want to input: Input 5 values to sort

The ascending order of the values:
11
13
15
20
25
Click me to see the solution
18. Write a C program that sort numbers using Stooge Sort method. Go to the
editor
Stooge sort is a recursive sorting algorithm with a time complexity of O(nlog
3 / log 1.5 ) = O(n2.7095...). The running time of the algorithm is thus
slower compared to efficient sorting algorithms, such as Merge sort, and is
even slower than Bubble sort.
Click me to see the solution

19. Write a C program that sort numbers using Randomised quick sort method. Go
to the editor
From Wikipedia:
A simple example is randomized QuickSort, where the pivot is chosen randomly,
and divides the elements into three partitions: elements less than pivot,
elements equal to pivot, and elements greater than pivot. The randomized
QuickSort require a lot of resources but always generate the sorted array as
an output.
It is obvious that QuickSort always generates the solution which in this case
the sorted array. Unfortunately, the time complexity is not that obvious. It
turns out that the running time depends on which element we pick as a pivot.
Click me to see the solution

20. Write a C program that sort numbers using Pigeonhole sort method. Go to
the editor
From Wikipedia:
Pigeonhole sorting is a sorting algorithm that is suitable for sorting lists
of elements where the number of elements (n) and the length of the range of
possible key values (N) are approximately the same. It requires O(n + N) time.
It is similar to counting sort, but differs in that it "moves items twice:
once to the bucket array and again to the final destination [whereas] counting
sort builds an auxiliary array then uses the array to compute each item's
final destination and move the item there.
The pigeonhole algorithm works as follows:
Given an array of values to be sorted, set up an auxiliary array of initially
empty "pigeonholes", one pigeonhole for each key in the range of the keys in
the original array.
Going over the original array, put each value into the pigeonhole
corresponding to its key, such that each pigeonhole eventually contains a list
of all values with that key.
Iterate over the pigeonhole array in increasing order of keys, and for each
pigeonhole, put its elements into the original array in increasing order.
Click me to see the solution

21. Write a C program that sort numbers using partition sort method. Go to the
editor
Partition-exchange sort is an efficient sorting algorithm. Developed by
British computer scientist Tony Hoare in 1959 and published in 1961, it is
still a commonly used algorithm for sorting. When implemented well, it can be
about two or three times faster than its main competitors, merge sort and
heapsort.
Click me to see the solution

22. Write a C program that sort numbers using Pancake sort method. Go to the
editor
From Wikipedia,
Pancake sorting is the colloquial term for the mathematical problem of sorting
a disordered stack of pancakes in order of size when a spatula can be inserted
at any point in the stack and used to flip all pancakes above it. A pancake
number is the minimum number of flips required for a given number of pancakes.
In this form, the problem was first discussed by American geometer Jacob E.
Goodman. A variant of the problem is concerned with burnt pancakes, where each
pancake has a burnt side and all pancakes must, in addition, end up with the
burnt side on bottom.
Click me to see the solution

23. Write a C program that sort numbers using Multi-key quicksort method. Go
to the editor
Multi-key quicksort, also known as three-way radix quicksort, is an algorithm
for sorting strings. This hybrid of quicksort and radix sort was originally
suggested by P. Shackleton, as reported in one of C.A.R. Hoare's seminal
papers on quicksort, its modern incarnation was developed by Jon Bentley and
Robert Sedgewick in the mid-1990s. The algorithm is designed to exploit the
property that in many problems, strings tend to have shared prefixes.
Click me to see the solution

24. Write a C program that sort numbers using Comb sort method. Go to the
editor
From Wikipedia,
Comb sort is a relatively simple sorting algorithm originally designed by
Włodzimierz Dobosiewicz and Artur Borowy in 1980, later rediscovered by
Stephen Lacey and Richard Box in 1991. Comb sort improves on bubble sort.
Click me to see the solution

25. Write a C program that sort numbers using Bucket sort method. Go to the
editor
From Wikipedia,
Bucket sort, or bin sort, is a sorting algorithm that works by distributing
the elements of an array into a number of buckets. Each bucket is then sorted
individually, either using a different sorting algorithm, or by recursively
applying the bucket sorting algorithm. It is a distribution sort, a
generalization of pigeonhole sort, and is a cousin of radix sort in the
most-to-least significant digit flavor. Bucket sort can be implemented with
comparisons and therefore can also be considered a comparison sort algorithm.
Click me to see the solution

26. Write a C program that sort numbers using Binary insertion sort method. Go
to the editor
Binary insertion sort employs a binary search to determine the correct
location to insert new elements, and therefore performs ⌈log2 n⌉ comparisons
in the worst case, which is O(n log n).
Click me to see the solution
